# Preface to Linear Models with R (First Edition)

There are many books on regression and analysis of variance. These
books expect different levels of preparedness and place different
emphases on the material. This book is not introductory. It presumes
some knowledge of basic statistical theory and practice. Readers are
expected to know the essentials of statistical inference such as
estimation, hypothesis testing and confidence intervals. A basic
knowledge of data analysis is presumed. Some linear algebra and
calculus are also required.

The emphasis of this text is on the practice of regression and
analysis of variance. The objective is to learn what methods are
available and more importantly, when they should be applied. Many
examples are presented to clarify the use of the techniques and to
demonstrate what conclusions can be made. There is relatively less
emphasis on mathematical theory, partly because some prior knowledge
is assumed and partly because the issues are better tackled elsewhere.
Theory is important because it guides the approach we take. I take a
wider view of statistical theory. It is not just the formal theorems.
Qualitative statistical concepts are just as important in statistics
because these enable us to actually do it rather than just talk about
it. These qualitative principles are harder to learn because they are
difficult to state precisely but they guide the successful experienced
statistician.

Data analysis cannot be learned without actually doing it. This means
using a statistical computing package. There is a wide choice of
such packages. They are designed for different audiences and have
different strengths and weaknesses. I have chosen to use `R` 
Why have I used `R`? There are several reasons.

1. *Versatility*. `R` is also a programming language, so I am not
  limited by the procedures that are preprogrammed by a package. It is
  relatively easy to program new methods in `R`.
  
2. *Interactivity*. Data analysis is inherently interactive.  Some
  older statistical packages were designed when computing was more
  expensive and batch processing of computations was the norm. Despite
  improvements in hardware, the old batch processing paradigm lives on
  in their use. `R` does one thing at a time, allowing us to make
  changes on the basis of what we see during the analysis.
  
3. *Freedom*. `R` is based on S from which the commercial
  package `Splus` is derived. `R` itself is open-source software and may
  be obtained free of charge to all.  Linux, Macintosh, Windows and
  other UNIX versions are maintained and can be obtained from the
  R-project at `www.r-project.org`. `R` is mostly compatible
  with `Splus`, meaning that `Splus` could easily be used for most of the
  examples provided in this book.
  
4. *Popularity*. SAS is the most common statistics package in general use
  but `R` or S is most popular with researchers in statistics.  A look
  at common statistical journals confirms this popularity.  `R` is also
  popular for quantitative applications in finance.
